To master electrical safety, we must first understand electricity itself.
Imagine electricity as water in a system of pipes.
The amount of water flowing is the 'current,' measured in Amperes.
The pressure pushing that water is the 'voltage,' measured in Volts.
Finally, any restriction in the pipe that slows the flow is 'resistance,' measured in Ohms.
These three concepts are linked by a fundamental principle called Ohm's Law.
It states that Voltage equals Current multiplied by Resistance.
This is crucial because it's the current, the flow of electricity, that poses the greatest danger to the human body.
Even a very small amount of current, as little as a few milliamps, can cause severe injury or death if
it passes through the vital organs.
The human body, especially when wet, can be a good conductor of electricity.
If you touch a live electrical source, your body can complete the circuit, allowing current to flow through you, resulting
in an electric shock.
The severity of this shock is determined by three factors: the amperage of the current, the path it takes through
your body—for instance, across the heart is extremely dangerous—and how long you are exposed to it.
That's why we use materials that block this flow.
These are called insulators.
Materials like rubber and plastic are excellent insulators and are used to cover wires and make the handles of tools.
Conversely, materials that allow electricity to flow freely are called conductors.
Metals and water are common conductors.
Understanding this distinction is the first step in protecting yourself.